Economic Undercurrents of Ghana's Ecological Suicide
----------------------------------------------------

1. What is Ecological Suicide?

Ecological Suicide is a term that I have borrowed from the title of
[cite] whose work brought the attention of the general public to state
of the ecology of Ghana. Her work focused on the practices that have
led to the current situation and points out the urgency of the
problem.

In this essay, I aim to point out the economic trends that underlie
the problem. I try to be as broad as possible to cover how the
situation has kept developing not just in Ghana but in the rest of the
world. I try to show that it is not just our monetary system or
political system or whatever system that you may think of that is the
main driving force behind the problem but the economic system. To
start, we must first explore the basis of economics.

2. What is Economics?

For the purposes of our discussion, a rigorous academic definition of
economics will not be very helpful. The main reason for this is that
the intended audience for this article are not those concerned with
with the rigour required of academic writing. Also, by using a proper
academic definition, we will be sidetracked on the matter at
hand. Finally, a proper academic definition is unsuitable for the
issues with which we are concerned.

Economics, for our purposes is the study of how resources are utilised
to meet human needs.

This definition is definitely not perfect but for our purposes, it
will work just fine. It places the two most important concepts for our
discussion -- human needs and resources at its center.

2.1 A brief discussion of the definition

Let's quickly touch on the two main concepts in the definition, human
needs and resources.

By human needs, we mean anything that a human being may want to have,
for example, you may want a house, a car, a wife etc. This definition
does not leave out immaterial needs such as comfort, emotional
balance, love etc.

Resources include everything that a human being will use to satisfy
his needs. This could be artificial for example, a computer or purely
natural, for example trees, rivers, wind, etc.

2.2 Relation between politics and economics

Politics is the study of how resources are distributed within human
organisations.

Once again, I admit that these definitions are very loose but for our
purposes they are quite suitable.

From these very loose definitions, we can draw the line between
politics and economics. While politics is interested with the
distribution of resources, economics is concerned with how the
resources are used to meet human needs. Given this relation between
politics and economics, we can already see how hard any discussion of
economics can be without touching on politics.

There is a more subtle relationship between economics and politics
which, by now, many of my readers may have noticed. This relationship
is that both these fields of study all bother on resource usage and
distribution within human organisations. Therefore, any study of
resources which fails to take into account both the underlying
economics and political structures will be in danger of being open to
attack by studies in the field of economics and politics.

These attacks will be valid as long as the political and economic
foundations of the work are not strong enough to hold the work up
against them.

This essay tries to contribute to the work of [cite] who points out
many farming, fishing and mining practices and how they are affecting
the ecology of Ghana. The work points out the urgency of the issue and
leaves many of those who encounter it with a sense of concern for the
future of natural resources within the country. However it leaves out
developments in economics that have contributed to the problem.

Therefore, the main aim of this essay are to point out the economic
developments the have led to and continue to support the problem. By
so doing, there will be enough economic background to any reader of
[cite] who is concerned and wants to find ways to solve the
problem. Finally, a few of the current proposals will be evaluated to
point out how they intend to solve the problem.

The intended audience for this essay are those that are aware of the
problem and are trying to come up with solutions. Since this group
will be very diverse, emphasis on academic rigour will be relaxed and
will be shifted to ensuring quick understanding of the concepts and
problems. The goal is that the reader will have the knowledge
necessary to evaluate solutions and offer improvements to the problem.

3. A Quick Overview of Selected Economic Systems.

While economics, as we have seen, is the study of how resources are
utilised to meet human needs, economic systems are the social
organisations by which resources are mobilised for the production of
goods and service to meet human needs.It can be said that much of the
study of economics has as it goal, the perfection of economic systems
towards some defined ideal.

Aside: This dichotomy is very helpful when you want to dive into a
deeper study of economics since a lot of debates in the study
economics hides the ideals of the economists. Also, we must be very
careful of the advice that we get from economists because of the fact
that they hide their ideals behind their often complicated
mathematical models. This is also one of the reasons why some writers
have called for deeper look into the nature of economics as a science
[cite].

In this section, we will be taking a look at a few economic
systems. The intention here is not to be thorough but to provide a
brief and understandable foundation in the economic developments which
are of the most relevance in analysing the farming, fishing and mining
practices that are harming Ghana's ecology. We would also try to point
out the real cost of these practices.

3.1 Hunter-gatherer economies.

In hunter-gatherer economies, the main need to satisfy was food. This
was obtained through hunting or scavenging. The material conditions
are minimal and more time is spent for leisure activities than
work. All produce is shared among the people. There is no need for
trading. There are no rich or poor people. There is no need for
credit. In these societies, everybody is expected to participate in
the work needed to keep the society running. There is no
unemployment. Given the material conditions of such societies,
basically all their needs are met by the natural resources
available. The demand placed on natural resources is minimal because
of the material conditions that are needed for their lifestyle. [cite]

Considering the lifestyle of hunter-gatherers, the main danger becomes
clear: what happens when two or three hunting or foraging trips prove
unsuccessful and the community runs out of food reserves? The whole
community might have to go hungry for a day or two. 

Agriculture, being the cultivation of plants and livestock to meet
human needs is sometimes used to add to the security of food supplies
of the community. However, this is not always the case.

3.2 Agrarian economies

As we have seen, hunter-gatherer economies might not have food
security. Agriculture can help in that regard. Some societies with the
right technology and environmental conditions become full agrarian
societies.

With the development of agriculture, material conditions can improve
since people have can produce enough raw materials to make even more
sophisticated things.

Since one person may not produce everything that he needs, he might
have to trade with other people in the community. While barter will be
sufficient for primitive trade, it is ineffective for a more
complicated trading system. Many such economies develop money as a
means of trading. Studies about the history of money usually show that
it first appears in agrarian economies. [cite]. However, the use of
money is usually limited to trading, not credit or storage of wealth.

Agriculture, while granting food security, given the right practices
also leads to a depency on arable land. Land distribution among people
has never been equal. Some people have more land than others. In many
Ghanaian communities, settlers on land will divide the land between
different families. People who move from one community to another
might not any land at all to farm with. To prevent people who are
willing to work from going hungry, agrarian societies need a system of
credit. We should note that credit in agrarian societies is not always
money. Credit can come in the form of seeds, tools and land. The
lender and borrower will have a scheme to share the produce that is
obtained using the credit. Given this system, people who do not have
any land can still work to feed themselves and their
families. Unemployment is limited to those who value leisure more than
work. A diligent person may work over a number of years to buy his own
land and live on it. In fact, such system of credit is still used
among many tribes in Ghana to this day. The Akans have ... and
... systems [cite].

At this point, we should note that agrarian societies could be
primitive or advanced. In a more primitive agrarian society, the
emphasis is on subsistence farming. People mainly grow what they eat
and trade of the excess for things that they need but cannot make by
themselves. In such societies, the role of money is limited to trading
and cannot be used for credit. Also, primitive agrarian societies do
not have people living solely on the rent of their land. It was
neither necessary nor feasible.

The advanced agrarian societies place more emphasis on trading than
the subsistence farming. In these advance agrarian societies, the
farmer will grow a few crops on a large scale in order to sell on the
market. The farmer does not grow food for himself anymore. He grows
for the market in order to make money and buy food, seeds and tools
for the next planting season. Owners of land in such advanced agrarian
societies can live simply by taking rent from the tenant farmers on
the land.

All of that aside, in agrarian societies, the division between rich
and poor starts to emerge. We can also notice that given the system of
trade and credit that is necessary for the agrarian economy to run,
people who have vast ownership of land can simply rent it out and
benefit richly from the labour of peasants trying to gain their
economic freedom.

While the emphasis in the life of hunter-gatherer societies is leisure,
we can claim that the emphasis of life in agrarian economies is
self-sufficiency. A person who owns a rich farm that produces all
of his needs is a truly wealthy person in agrarian societies.

3.2.1 Self-sufficiency and homesteading

Many agrarian societies place an emphasis on self-sufficiency. What is
self-sufficiency? Self-suffiency is the reliance on oneself to provide
all their needs. In fact, one can claim that many communities in Ghana
before the arrival of the Europeans were already self-sufficient.

Homesteading is a lifestyle that emphasises
self-sufficiency. Homesteaders try to settle in places that many
people do not wish to live. In fact, homesteading was one of the
contributions that led to America's development as an independent
country.

However, while hunter-gatherer societies may lack food security,
agrarian societies can run into the problem of scarcity of land. It is
a keen insight into this particular problem that led to the
development of Malthusian economics.

3.2.1 Malthusian economics and why it failed

Malthusian economics, sometimes refered to as Malthusianism was
developed by an English priest and economist called Reverend Thomas
Robert Malthus. His argument was simple: Population grows at an
exponential rate while the growth of food supply grows at a linear
rate. Therefore at some point, there will be more human beings than
can be fed. [cite]

The Malthusian "trap" refers to the point where humans will be driven
to famine because of the lack of agricultural produce to feed the
huge population.

The premise of his argument that is not as alarming as the
conclusion. Even more disturbing is the recommendation: population
must be controlled. [cite]

We are still yet to see humanity wiped out by famine, even though the
population of humans has only kept rising since Malthus had his 3
children and passed on. [cite] However believers in Malthusianism are
still alive and they are working hard in fields of population control
and eugenics.

Of the many reasons why we are yet to enter into the Malthusian trap,
one of them is of the most relevance to our discussion: the industrial
revolution. 

3.3 Industrial economies

The industrial revolution began in England in the 18th century.

The industrial revolution marks the point in the history of mankind
where production was carried out not only by manual labour but also
mechanised factories.

In other words, some men left their farms and entered factories.

For the factories to produce you need people to provide labour. In
agrarian societies, there are always people who do not have a lot of
land in order to be self sufficient. Even people who were
self-sufficient needed money in order to trade. Also, sheer population
increase contributed it own fair share of people. Given the deal of
working in a factory to make some quick cash, few of such people
refused.

Improvements in agricultural practices created raw materials necessary
for the operation of the factory. Factories usually need a single crop
or only a few crops. Farmers in industrialised societies have to grow
only this single crop which they can sell to the factory. This
practice is known as monocropping.

Finally, the agrarian society had created a markets in which goods
produced in the factories can be sold at a profit. Profit is a form of
rent [cite] and there is never a shortage of people looking to make
rents.

On one side, the owners of the factories got their profit. On the
other side, people could obtain goods at very cheap prices. In the
middle, workers earned their wages. So one might be led to conclude
that the system was a win-win-win situation.This would have in fact
being the case if not for all the other things that we have left out
of the story so far.

The first of things that have been left out of the story is
technological innovation. Technological innovation kept going on since
the industrial revolution started and it is still in force. Its
effects will be better appreciated later when all the other things
that have been left out of the story are introduced.

The next is the human desire for convenience. Imagine having to sheer
sheep, wash wool, dye it, spin it then weave it into a cloth, just to
have a single shirt. Factories simplified life. They made things
convenient for many people.

The rise of the working class. We have seen that in agrarian
societies, there were people who didn't have land or had very little
land. These people do not have much to live on aside from their
labour. The factories provided work for those who could not (or
didn't) find work on the land of other people.

Finance and banking. In the simple agrarian societies, credit in the
form of money is not very important. In fact, the concept of taking
interest on money would be very wierd for someone living in a simple
agrarian society. For them, money was mostly for the purpose of
trading. Credit had to be in the form of land or tools for producing
goods that were necessary. The borrower will have to pay back the
lender in the form of the produce. A common form of credit was seeds
[cites] needed for farming but money itself was not really a form of
credit. It seems straightforward, for something that we cannot simply
plant in the ground and get multiplied, why should anyone charge
interest on it? However for someone who needs to run a factory, money
was crucial. With money, all the things necessary to build and operate
the factory can be obtained on the market. Needless to say, money
needed to build and operate a factory was far more than a single man
needed for his daily affairs. In order to raise huge amounts of money
for the factory, there has to be a financial system. Without a
financial system, the industrial revolution could never had grown at
the pace that it did.

3.3.1 Industrialisation and Production

Factories are simply mechanised production facilities. They take a
single set of inputs and have a single set of outputs. Factories do
not accept variety. For example, we cannot simply take a cotton
processing factory and change it into a wool processing factory. We
must first make major modifications to the design of the factory.

Every new innovation in products or production methods requires the
creation of yet another factory. The old one might simply die off or
must be modified to keep it running.

We can say that the hidden assumption of a factory is that humans
needs only the thing produced in the factory. Let me elaborate. Take a
cotton processing facility. It takes cotton and processes it into
cloth. The quality of cloth that the factory can produce is
fixed. Everybody who buys from the factory buys the same cloth. As
long as people are reliant on this single factory, they can only get
the quality of cloth that the factory produces.

Factories can do one thing very well. On the other hand, humans and
their needs keep changing.

Factories kill off any thought of people producing things
themselves. It is a lot easier to buy the thing that the factory has
processed and polished than to make your own crude products. Simple
subsistence cannot work anymore. To live at the standard of society,
you must buy from the factories.

People must produce the few things that the factory requires on a
large scale. Everybody must produce at least one thing well in order
to obtain a share in the monotonous products that come out of these
factories.

Let me be clear here, I do not claim at all that factories are
bad. This is simply an investigation into the roots of the ecological
problems that we are facing. Factories multiply the productivity of
humans. We simply could never have an abundance of things and the
convenience with which we obtained them if we stuck with manual
labour.

Remember, one of my main aims here is to give people relevant
information with which they can evaluate the proposed solutions to our
ecological problems.

3.3.2 Industrialisation and Divison of Labour

Let's return to the point made before the digression: everybody must
learn to produce one thing extremely well in order to meet the
requirements of the factory.

Industrialisation requires huge farms that specialise in producing
only the crops that are needed by the factory. These farms need huge
amounts of fertilizers and modified plants that can grow every season
without the need for a fallow period. 

Aside from farmers who are required to produce only one crop on a very
large scale, workers in factories need to do only one thing. By doing
only one thing, they can individually produce a lot of things. For
example, in a shirt manufacturing company, there will be people who
only do the cutting. Then there will be people who sew on only the
hands, then a separate group of people sew on the neck and so on till
the shirt is finally completed. The thinking is that by doing this,
they can be extremely efficient and produce at a lower cost.

3.3.4 Industrialisation and education

The requirement to produce homogenuous products very efficiently was
achieved with the help of division of labour. With division of labour,
workers are required to concentrate on a small part of the whole
work. The productivity gains from such a system was good for the
efficiency of the factory.

This system had an effect on the education of people. The educational
system needed to develop workers for the factory must be structured
like a factory which produces specialised workers for (yet another)
factory.

Recent developments in human resource management [cite] has shown that
people who work in very narrowly defined roles are not bound to be
very satisfied with their work. This is the basis for the whole
movement towards job enrichment [cite].

There is a more serious problem with an educational system structured
for the needs of a factory and not the individual. That is, what
happens when the factory does not require the work that the product
of the educational system can offer? The person becomes "unnecessary"
to production. On the other hand, his skills are so specialised that
he cannot do anything for himself. This situation is what is called
"unemployment". To someone living in an agrarian economy unemployment
is simply laziness. In an industrial economy, unemployment is simply
"learned helplessness". One can claim that unemployment is only a
phenomenon in industrialised economy.

Aside from the people graduating from the educational system that
gives them no skills for living, there are also people who are
unemployed simply because they do not have any of the required skills
of the factory.

Given a dependence on the factory for all the things that people need
in their lives, and no knowledge of how they can produce the things
the need by themselves, how should these "unemployed" people live?
Some people has suggested that there should be a Universal Basic
Income scheme. This scheme will be discussed later.

3.3.4 Industrialisation and the Centralisation of Economic Power

We have seen how three different alternatives to sustain growing
profits can lead to problems, since it is not really possible for any
business to keep growing profits at a positive rate every year without
having negative effects on the people that rely on the factory for
their livelihood. This includes even the owners of the factory,
who may be the main beneficiaries of the profits of the factory.

A subtle effect of operating a factory is the centralisation of
economic power. What do I mean by economic power? Economic power is
the power to determine what the available resources should be used
for. A concentration of power of whatever form in the hands of a
small group of people, ultimately leads to tyrrany. The owner of the
factory determines what will be produced. The consumers have no say
over what they get to see in the market. What was available to people
in the agrarian society -- the ability to choose what to grow on the
land -- is taken away and replaced with a market which determines what
you have to produce and what you can buy. 

3.3 Finance, Money and Banking

Let's take a brief detour and talk about money. From our previous
discussions, we have seen that money's role in an agrarian society is
primarily for trading purposes. We cannot talk about money in a
hunter-gatherer economy because trading doesn't exist at the scale
that money will be helpful.

Contrary to what many readers may believe money has existed in many
societies in many forms long before the invention of silver and gold
coins which are considered to be precursors of our modern paper
money system [cite]. We can talk of tribes who used stones and others
that used cowries to serve as money.

[I'm walking on a thin rope here consider deleting this]
In a primitive agrarian economy, money is basically a means of
exchange, not a store of value [cite]
[Maybe Zarlenga can help here]

In an industrial economy, the role of money is shifted slightly. In
addition to money serving as means of exchange, money must of also
serve as a form of capital. By capital, I mean all artificial
resources that are not needed for their own sake but for the creation
of other resources.

Money is used to mobilise the resources that the factory must use as
input. On the other hand, money must be obtained when the goods that
are produced on the factory is sold on the market.

In order to mobilise huge amounts of money, a financial system is
necessary. In any financial system, money is not seen as a medium of
exchange but as credit. What is credit? To keep things simple, let's
simple say that credit is basically debt.

Aside:
This theory that in a financial system, money is credit (or debt) is
fiercely debated. [cite] It is only in recent times that central
banks, the primary issuers of currency have come out to admit that
money is actually credit in a modern financial system. [cite]

Things can get a little confusing here, so a bit of explanation will
help. The main source of confusion here is that if money is debt then
what is it written against? To get the point of this question, let's
go back to the agrarian economy. In an agrarian economy, money does
not serve the purpose of credit. Credit is granted in the form of real
assets such as seeds, land, trees etc. Once the credit is granted, it
is expected that it will be used for a productive activity, in their
case, farming. Once the productive activity is over, the input will be
multiplied and the provider of credit expects a share of the
produce. In a financial system, money is treated as credit just like
the case of an agrarian economy. In the case of the factory, a share
of the profit or a percentage of return is expected. This is called
interest. Now back to the question: if money is credit, then what is
is written against? In the light of the agrarian economy the credit is
granted against the physical produce, this can be seeds, fruits,
trees, etc. but what about the money in the financial system? It is
not written against the physical products of the factory. It is
written against money. This means that interest (or dividends) have to
be paid in monetary terms. Therefore in a financial system where money is
credit, money must always keep multiplying in order for there to be
enough to pay the credit. For a factory, this means
that production must also keep growing, in order to keep with interest
and dividend demands.

This particular problem is exarcebated in capitalist economies where
there is private ownership of the means of production.

Also for an advanced financial system to exist, the emphasis of
production has to be for trading. All resources, both natural or
artificial has to be available at a monetary price. Any tampering of
this condition hinders the role of money as a form of credit. This is
the case even if interest is paid for in monetary terms, at some point
it needs to converted into real assets. Money is worthless when there
is nothing to buy with it. Let me elaborate. Consider that you hold a
million dollars in the middle of a dessert and you were thirsty, if
there's no water to buy, your money cannot save you from thirst. The
point being that money is only as good as what it can buy.


[Note to Danny]
This is what I like to call the great deception. Some people take
security in "financial assets" because the "experts" tell them that
they are less risky. This mentality works fine until there is an
inevitable collapse of the financial system and the stupidity of that
mentality shines forth in all its glory.

Once every resource, whether natural or artificial is available on the
market for a monetary price, everybody must work for money. The whole
world can be reduced to its monetary value. To keep up with living
standards, the monetary value of everything has to be realised, the
cheaper the extraction, the better. This is the economic reason of all
the harmful practices that we see: surface mining, pair trawling,
mono-cropping, modified seedlings, etc.

3.4 A Note on Capitalism

Capitalism is an economic system. In capitalism, the resources for
production are owned by individuals who are free to choose what they
will be used for.

Some people blame the problems that we have with the ecology on
capitalism [cite]. To attribute all the ecological problems that we are
currently facing on capitalism is a half-truth because we can create
very different economic systems from capitalism but without addressing
how production, distribution and consumption occurs, the problem will
only keep getting worse, regardless for which alternative is
chosen.

3.3.3 Capitalism and the goal of life

We talk about how the goal of life has shifted away from leisure (the
pursuit of individual interests) to making and accumulating
money.

The love for money created the philosophy of individualism. Where we
now we now see anyone that has a lot of money as "virtuous" or has
wisdom, without considering that without an unsatiable appetite for
material things, no human being will accumulate and keep such huge
amounts of money.

With a new paradigm comes new things that are praised. For example,
holding huge amounts of a single resource can be basically seen as a
form of hoarding. Hoarding is a sign of greed and this is frowned upon
in many societies and religions. In a capitalistic society, a worthy
goal of life is to own as much as possible. To be rich is a
virtue. This has not always been the case.

The focus on one man and how much he owns is the basis of life in a
capitalist society. This is described as individualism and it is
arguably the single dominant philosophy of the current age we are
living in. We hold up "entrepreneurs", people who have "made it" in
life. Kids are told to hold these people up as role models. No matter
how cruel the person is or how poor his moral standards are, as long
as he has a lot of wealth, he is virtuous and must be praised. This is
the basis of the paradigm in which we live.

3.4.3 Competition and Knowledge

In an industrial capitalist economy, there are problems even worse
than the loss of choice. Capitalism promotes competition. With
competition, there can only be one winner. The victor in the battle
over the marketplace will definitely try to consolidate his power with
every means available. He can buy up the competition (if he is large
enough), he can skew regulation in his favour, he can try many things
to keep his power. Of all the things that can be done in a competitive
market, one of them is the most destructive: the lock-up of knowledge.

Knowledge is the only thing in this world that does not rot, corrode,
die off or get used up. Knowledge shared is never lost. Knowledge used
is never lost but in a competitive environment, all the players are
forced to keep their knowledge secret in order to gain a competitive
edge over other players. In fact, with a loss of knowledge comes the
loss of power. Any knowledge lost leads to a worse life to those
deprived of it. Better knowledge creates better lives and the fact
that to knowledge is built-upon, makes it the most ideal thing to be
shared but with a competitive market system, everybody must keep some
knowledge secret in order to gain a small edge over the next player.

The most important thing to solve the current problems lies not in the
fact that industrialisation is bad, or that capitalism promotes waste,
or that the financial system needs to keep growing indefinitely in
order to prevent it from collapsing but that the keys to knowledge has
been locked up inside the factories. A truly ethical company is not
the one that does community projects and gives charity but the one
that produces knowledge and gives it out freely to improve the lives
of other people. This is equivalent to the proverb of teaching a man
to fish and he will eat everyday but giving of fish will only give him
a single meal. A truly ethical company would stop giving out fish and
start teaching people how to fish and make themselves more
self-reliant.

3.3.1 Capitalism and Consumerism

[This should be moved under capitalism]

In a capitalist economy, individuals own the means of production. They
are also free to determine what to use them for. The assumption is
that being rational people, they will put their resources to the most
"profitable" use. Remember that profit is a form of rent. 

For a factory to be profitable, people need to buy what it makes. The
circle must not stop. We must produce inputs, feed it into the factory
for production and buy the output.Aside from that, the production must
grow at a steady pace. This is due to financial pressures that are
placed on the factory. Where the output growth cannot be achieved,
cost must have to be reduced and if that also fails, prices need to be
raised.

What I just described is the basics of consumerism, which is a very
broad topic and a comprehensive coverage will not be carried out
here. I encourage my readers to look deeper into the issue.

The model of operating with a growing profitability is bound to leave
one of the three parties at a disadvantage. At some point, due to the
fact that humans do not really like to live on a single thing but
demand variety, demand will fall. This is true, even for products that
might be considered to be essential. The farmer (or producer of raw
materials) might be forced to cut costs arbitrarily OR the buyer
might be forced to pay a higher price for the products of the factory
OR the workers in the factory might be forced to take lower wages.

Any of the options that I have mentioned are prevalent in any
industrial economy, no matter what form politics is at play. However,
for capitalist societies (where the is private ownership of the means
of production), another problem is created. Some of the options that
are taken by factories to maintain a growing profit will ultimately
lead to a fall in the demand for the factory's products. This is
because any reduction in the wages of suppliers of raw materials or
workers or an increase in prices for the consumers will lead to less
of their income available for spending on the product. In a capitalist
society, the way to solve this problem is by lending money to the
buyers in order to sustain the growing profits of the factory.

Another alternative to sustain profits will be to increase the amount
of goods sold by the factory. This alternative will be discussed
next.

We should note that all these different strategies are not mutually
exclusive. In fact, many factories need to pursue a combination of
these strategies in order to sustain a growing profit.

3.3.6 A note on Colonialism and the Mercantile system.

Another candidate for blame in Ghana for our ecological problems is
the fact that were once a colony of the United Kingdom. Many of the
practices highlighted by [cite] are due to the impacts of colonialism
and how we were poorly transitioned out of it [cite myself]. In this
section, I will take a brief detour and discuss the roots of
colonialism and how they relate to industrialisation and capitalism.

One of the major reasons for colonialisation was the want of input for
the factories in Europe. This need arose from the industrialisation of
the time. The production centers were centralised and the need to keep
producing due the pressures of the financial system forced the owners
of the factories to look for new sources of raw materials and also the
neede to look for markets in order to sell the increased produce.

For a better understanding of the thinking behind colonisation, a
brief exploration of mercantilism is warranted. To understand
mercantilism, let's consider this simple scenario. Consider there are
two factories producing textiles. One from France and the other from
England. Both are facing the pressure to sell more in order to make
more profits. The French producer decides to export his textiles to
England. In order to make a better profit, he decides to cut his
prices just a little bit. The strategy works and very soon the England
producer notices a drop in his sales. He finds out that the French
producer is the cause. In order to fight back, he decides to cut his
price and also export to France. This is the start of a price
war. Different merchants at the time saw this problem and decided to
lobby their government to place heavy tarrifs on imports and subsidies
on export. For a time this worked and provided the bases for the
wealth of many European countries. However the need to keep growing
still prevailed. This is where the colonies come in. In order to
support the growth of the factories in the main country, the colony
will provide raw materials in exchange for finished goods. This system
worked very well until political freedom was granted to the colonised
economies (including Ghana). However, economic freedom is still yet to
be realised.

While on the surface, mercantilism is no longer practiced, the "free
trade" economics that replaced it, developing countries still suffer
from the same problem imposed by the mercantile system.

To blame all the woes of the country on its colonial past will be
wrong but without true economic freedom, our ecological problems will
not end.

3.3.9 The true cost of ecological problems

If there is one thing that we can say for certain about nature, it is
that it loves variety. This is evidenced by the sheer number of
different species plants and animals. The fact that humans can breed
these creatures and come up with new varieties makes matters even more
complicated.

The factory, by whatever design, cannot handle the sheer amount of
variety offered by nature. With all the needs of humans being
satisfied through factories, a few species will have to dominate
(artificially) over all others. It is in this sense that we can claim
that the factory abhors variety. Nature suffers as a
consequence. Nature loses its variety, for the poverty of monotony.


4. Proposals on Solving the Problem

What can we do about this problem? This is probably the most
significant question of our age. How can we organise our economy to
create variety, not just in man-made goods but also in the nature
while addressing the many social problems that capitalism has created.

I believe this is a question that a single person can solve. We need
everybody to join this great intellectual, social, political and
spiritual struggle of our time. Our future depends on it.

Here, I review some of the popular proposals that are being have being
brought forward by some of the leading academics of the world.

4.1 Modern Money Theory (MMT) and The Green New Deal

4.1 Universal Basic Income

4.2 Eco-credit system [find the true name]

4.3 Worker Co-operatives

4.4 Debt Jubilee

4.5 Public Banks

4.7 Alternatives to capitalism

5. Summary and Conclusion

As might have become obvious to many readers at this point, any change
to the economic system without changing the true heart of the system
-- the production, distribution and consumption part -- cannot solve
the ecological problem. Instead of helping solve the ecological
problem, solutions that ignore the heart of the economic system will
either leave the problem as it is or make it worse. This is the true
aim of the essay. To help you, the reader come up with solutions that
get to the heart of the problem and also evaluate solutions that
others might have come with in order to help save what is left of our
ecology. 
